# Understand Artistic Innovation Through Exploration-Exploitation Dynamics
Innovation is the wealth of human society. Successful innovation undoubtedly benefits our survival, culture, and well-being (Boyd et al., 2013; De Dreu, 2010; Mesoudi & Thornton, 2018). Even if innovation attempts fail, they won't cause significant costs to society, but may instead inspire future valuable creations (Ives et al., 2023; Maslach, 2016).
However, for individual creators, innovative attempts are not always adaptive (Soleas, 2020; Sterelny, 2016). Successful innovation can indeed bring huge profits and fame, but failed innovation may be a waste of time and resources . In contrast, sticking to familiar fields is safe, albeit sacrificing potential higher returns. 
Societal innovation emerges from the accumulation of individual innovation (Diepenmaat et al., 2020). To promote societal innovation, it is crucial to understand the mechanism of individual innovation. As mentioned above, individual innovation decision is a balance between trying novel creations and persisting with familiar creations, which aligns with the exploration-exploitation framework in psychology: to explore new options with potential higher returns, or to exploit the best option among known ones  (Cohen et al., 2007; Daw et al., 2006; Hills et al., 2015; Mehlhorn et al., 2015; Tsang et al., 2024). This exploration-exploitation framework has been used to understand a wide range of human behavior, including racial stereotypes (Bai et al., 2022), mate selection (Kolze et al., 2021), friendship (Cohen & Todd, 2018), organizational strategy (Gupta et al., 2006), and consumer choice (Schulz et al., 2019).
How do humans solve the exploration-exploitation tradeoff? A large number of laboratory studies have demonstrated that humans can hit a good balance between exploration and exploitation (Daw et al., 2006; Gershman, 2018; Schulz et al., 2019, 2020, 2018, Wilson et al., 2014, Wu et al., 2018):
People strategically explore more at early stage to gather information about environment. After enough information is gathered, they shift towards exploitation (Hotaling et al., 2021; Knox et al., 2012; Wilson et al., 2014). Similarly, developmental research suggests that as people age, their tendency to explore decreases, resembling the classic optimization algorithm simulated annealing (Frankenhuis & Gopnik, 2023; Gopnik, 2020; Liquin & Gopnik, 2022).
People also use the generalizable features of options to facilitate exploration decision (Schulz et al., 2020; Wu et al., 2020). People infer the value of a new option based on the its similarity to the options they have experienced. When they experience low reward, they tend to explore more dissimilar options next time (Schulz et al., 2020). 
A real-world study further confirms these two mechanisms (Schulz et al., 2019). This study utilized computational analysis over 1.6 million online food delivery orders to examine consumer choice behaviors. They found that exploratory behavior decreases over time, as consumers become more familiar with options. In addition, consumers also infer the quality of untried restaurants by combining features such as price, ratings, and delivery time, and explore more dissimilar options after bad experiences.
Does the innovative behavior of creators also conform to general exploration strategies? Using two datasets from the movie and music domains, we analyze artists’ innovation patterns to examine whether they can be explained through the exploration-exploitation framework. We propose two hypotheses:
H1 Innovation decreases as creators advance in their careers.
H2 Failed experiences will promote innovation with larger span.
Briefly, this study investigates the innovation mode of creators from the perspective of exploration-exploitation framework. By doing so, it not only deepens our understanding of how individual creators make innovative decisions, but also provides a unique opportunity to validate psychological theory using large-scale real-world data, bridging theoretical advance with practical applications.

